hello and welcome once again to Android
design in action i'm your host from a
nerik hey guys my name is Adam Kosh
today we'll be talking about podcast
creators and design tools now podcast
creators when we talk about podcast
creators we don't mean podcast listeners
which I believe the app clinic guys have
done before we're going to be talking
about podcast creation basically kind of
the process of recording I guess
creating recording managing and then
uploading your podcast to whatever you
know podcast host you use so with that
should we jump in okay okay so we talk
about podcast creation you're probably
thinking about a couple of different
different functions different I guess
basic behaviors that are podcast
creation apps should offer the first is
obviously to record audio the second is
probably to edit and fine-tune your
audio so like you know once you're done
creating or once you're done with a
recording going in and then trimming and
changing things and inserting effects
and muting things of that and then of
course management so you know just like
any sort of blog management app you
probably want some way to you know
publish items look at currently
published items have a draft mode for
certain things and so on and so forth
and then we also decided that you know
for podcast creation or I guess anything
that has like a thick mode you do have
two modes here you have the recording
mode like I'm currently capturing audio
and that's kind of like a something that
the user should be aware of almost like
playing music right if you're playing
music the user should be aware at all
times that music is playing and that's
why you know you see things like a
notification icon or if you're in the
app you you see kind of like a
persistent bar and then the other
obvious kind of very thick mode is or
lack thereof is just the idle state or
the pause state where you're not
recording anything so with these kind of
high-level functions you know we decided
to look then at actually i forgot to i
forget to mention we're not actually
going to redesign or reimagine any
existing apps we're just kind of going
to go through the process of designing
hypothetical podcast creation out so
here's kind of the the first set of
things that we thought about so second
thing a set of things that we thought
about is the kind of the the underlying
functions right so for each of these
main themes for creating for edun for
manage you want to have you know more
specific bits of functionality so for
creation you probably want to have the
ability to you know start and resume
recording during you know during the
actual recording you want to be able to
mute and unmute probably you know if
something comes up and you want to you
know silent insert of silence and then
you probably want to insert either live
sound effects or Clips like you know an
intro clip or an outro clip or like a
fake applause or something like that
would go you always did it go yeah the
gone and then for edit you want things
like to be able to edit the basic info
like the title of the scripture and you
know the stuff to basically it appears
in the RSS and then some basic kind of
editing functions as well as uploading
obviously right you want to be able to
upload the the final product to the
podcast podcast host and then from
management you obviously want to be able
to you know list the or met view the
list of published I guess podcast
episodes as well as I'm the list of
drafts and maybe manage the draft
somehow so we roughly and this is a very
very basic podcast creation app that
we're thinking about we roughly kind of
broke things out into these basic
functions and this kind of you know
doing this type of exercise kind of
helps scope out the app and it's a very
good idea to do something like this
before jumping into the design or the
layout or anything like more detailed so
with these you know high level functions
we then looked at you know just some
basic explorations of layout right so
once you know what the app does you want
to start thinking about you know what
how it roughly looks like and how
roughly behaves so you know we imagined
a you know a single kind of podcast
creation or recording screen with a nice
big you know I guess chronometer or
whatever to show that the current time
just so you know you know how you know
how far into the podcast you are you
want those you know those functions of
pause
resume and mute to be available
immediately and then you want to have
some way of exposing live effects right
so things like the intro clip the actual
clips the be gone things like that
you'll be able to expose that we also
and then there's some couple of notes
than they're not very important actually
one of the things i wanted to mention is
that during the sketching process you
know it's always important to think
about larger devices so you know these
are some annotations that as I was
sketching just thinking you know what
would this look like I'm tablets and
some of these annotations you know are
just some very basic things like you
know the multiple tabs split out into
multiple panes on tablets and you know
this happens in landscape and so on so
it's always good to keep in mind things
even if you don't fully sketch them out
just a make note of your thought process
of what things how things should adapt
on different devices the next thing we
want to do is look at the different
states so you know your app does have
two states it has a paused in a I guess
a recording state and then there's
here's just some ideas about what to do
with like the action bar what to do with
the the playing part or the record and
pause button and then another thing
that's very important on Android
obviously is notifications and we've
mentioned this probably a million times
it's very important to have really kind
of solid notifications so we immediately
thought that as one of these states in
this recording state we want to have a
notification especially if the if you're
not in the app and we just kind of did a
very quick mock of what that could look
like with the with the pause and mute
actions in line with the notification of
course it's a rich notification which
has these uh polls and meet buttons
directly in the notification which is
really nice hmm and I think I'm not
fully sure I don't remember the exact
framework details but I believe that in
a notification you can actually also
specify a chronometer or chronometer or
whatever it is so instead of showing the
time you can show the kind of time
elapsed for something so here it's just
showing the time elapsed incrementing
every second so you kind of get a feel
and on-the-fly updating feel for how
long the podcast can be is and then I
there's another note here and this is
something that that's just really
important to annotate your sketches to
make sure that you take down those those
brief moments of you know
of thought that you have when you're
thinking about all these different
things and then here's just another
quick sketch of what we thought things
could look like on a tablet where again
things are slightly bigger you know the
time display is slightly bigger things
are you know slightly rearranged but
then your two tabs there then split out
into into multiple tabs or into multiple
panes we have the kind of live effects
at i right and the recording stuff in
the left so that was the sketching
process and you know obviously this is a
very compressed design process and in a
real design process you want to you know
sketch much more you want to iterate you
want to show it to people and get
feedback we only have you know like a
basically a day to do this so we didn't
really go through the whole process but
um you know once you're done with
sketches once you kind of have a good
feel of what things should look like the
next step is to do wireframing so oh I
actually you know that's the bitch nurse
knows every time good the next thing is
to do wireframing so this this looks a
little higher fidelity than like a
regular wireframe this is actually in
Illustrator this was done in illustrator
most of our screen mock-ups are done in
photoshop this week we decided to do
things in Illustrator and you you'll
actually you probably won't see this
year but almost all these elements are
from the stencil kit which we'll talk
about that comes on developers Angela
complex design / downloads and so they
provide you with a fairly high fidelity
versions of things you don't necessarily
have to do that you can use lower
fidelity stencils even just squares and
rectangles just to get a feel for the
positioning but in this case this is
kind of like a medium fidelity mark
where it's not pixel perfect but it is
using the the actual visual elements of
hollow so here's what your management
screen can look like we roughly
separated things out in two drafts and
published so you know your drafts are
probably the thing you're thinking about
the most at any given moment is you know
the next step is that the next episode
and so those are prioritized at the top
and then there's there's a little subtle
kind of way to rearrange them I don't
want now we're talking about this and
yeah we were just thinking you know you
don't necessarily have to wait we
actually don't know a lot about creating
podcasts ourselves so depending on how
you
think people create podcasts you could
just prioritize these based on last
edited or last viewed or something like
that instead of be able to manually
rearrange I'm using those track handles
and if you do that you should definitely
mention like somewhere like over here
there's like April April first you
should show like last edited in at a
time just so that it's completely
obvious what the sort order is yeah you
could also limit it to like you know
five most recent and have something it
says here show all those yeah that's
that's nothing a good way to like I mean
you could actually do this using tabs
right you could have drafts and then
publish but this is kind of a it's a
nicer way for something everything at
once oh that so there's a bird in the
user with extra navigation okay so
whoops so you know there's some some
minor things here basically just kind of
the difference between drafts and
publishes the most important thing just
to kind of get the users thinking about
was most important first so that's
management we didn't kind of go into all
the details of management I'll actually
there's one missing screenshot here you
know if you're managing multiple
podcasts which you probably should allow
great way to do those using the spinner
navigation and actually another thing
here is that there shouldn't be an app
icon because there's no nowhere to go up
so this is like medium fidelity mock-ups
you're not really going to get the the
fullest kind of view of things from this
anyway let's move on so next is the the
creation and recording part and we spent
a lot of time thinking through this
since I think this is kind of the most
unique aspect of a podcast creation app
you have to really think about what the
process of recording is like what the
what the user experience is like they're
the process of managing blog posts or or
you know managing podcast episodes very
similar to blogs we didn't go into
detail there but so some of the things
you could do here and this is you know
as you can see this is what it looks
going to tablet so we split things up
into info and record right so info is
basically letting you manage the the
basic details of the episode like the
title the description things like that
but the most important part is the
recording process so here you'll see
that you know there's a nice big preview
of the the current duration nice big
affordances four paws and mute and then
this is kind of like interesting
flourish and this is where you can start
exploring
different UI types in a different
interesting UI elements you know it's
it's less interesting in sketches
because a little harder to visualize but
once you get down to you know low to
medium fidelity wireframes you can start
thinking through different interactions
so in this case we just thought you know
we're going to be cool if you kind of
have this like bar that changes height
based on the current volume and then
from from the left it actually just
creates the waves the wave is slowly
progressing to the left but this is this
little bar here is kind of growing and
shrinking and then when you're not
recording it just goes away so that's
kind of one interesting take on it I
haven't seen that before and then
another thing that we did here is we
combined the the live effect into into
the screen so we kind of took the
standard multi-pane approach we use a
combination of tabs and multi-pane here
but kind of a standard kind of great way
to use space I guess and this is nice
because you obviously want easy access
to these effects while you're recording
where is the info you can sort of edit
once before orgo you know when you've
paused or something like that yeah and
we'll see on the phone you still have
access to the stuff but it means just
one swipe oh yeah it's just taking
advantage of the extra screen real
estate of the larger device and then
here are just some examples of how you
can present like clips and live effects
obviously you know pressing the dada
thought should show you should kind of
take you to a customization or more
effects screen or something like that so
let's move on so here's what it will
look like on a phone again very similar
just that the effects portion is taken
into a separate tab and you have
basically the same UI is it's somewhat
responsive I mean you still have slight
changes in a VIN core navigation between
tablet or phone but the core apt is
still very much the same so this is the
recording state now what does it look
like in the in the pause state so in the
pause state year you no longer have the
option to mute mute doesn't make sense
and the resume button has basically kind
of been given extra treatment another
thing I wanted to call out is the action
bar so if you're recording the the UP
button should probably just take you you
know up to the management screen that
kind of white screen that we had and
then you should show the notification
probably or or like a persistent now
recording bar at the bottom
but if your paws it's kind of an
indication that either you're just
temporarily taking a break or you want
to or you're done right you're you're
actually done with this recording
session maybe you'll record more later
but you're done and so what we do is we
actually change the action bar to go
from showing the up by the UP button to
the done icon or the done button to kind
of further give you the the sense that
hey you know I can I can press down and
like I can learn from their publish we
also looked at the this info section so
editing the the details if you swipe
over you can edit the title the
description and you do still have this
kind of persistent bar at the top to
indicate that something is happening so
you always want to indicate that mode
right if you're in that thick heavy mode
like navigation or playing music or
something you always want to make sure
that there's something on-screen that
indicates that and if it's in the app it
could be a persistent bar like this if
you're out of the app then it should be
a notification and it's worth noting as
well that the the mute and pause buttons
down here also sort of persistent across
these tabs because you see it here in
the info and we sort of record as well
so that's sort of that fixed date coming
to the front again being able to control
it from any of these different screens
and then of course if you exit out the
app you've got the notification there to
control it yeah and if you swipe over to
effects and this is kind of one of the
reit one of the biggest reasons for this
if you're in effect if you're playing an
intro clip you probably want to mute
yourself for a moment so you press mute
press the intro clip and as soon as
that's done playing you kind of unmute
so it's it's very easy from a single
screen at any point to do what you want
to do and then they'll think one of the
last components of this is what happens
when you're in the info screen and
you're paused at that point you probably
want to give the user the option to
preview and publish so they press
preview publish it takes them to a
separate flow where they can kind of
maybe even edit make tweaks but they
they can kind of preview what they've
currently recorded once they're ready
it'll upload using like a persistent
like an ongoing notification with a
download upload progress and then
publish when they're ready so pretty
straightforward a lot of the stuff is
there's nothing very revolutionary but
here's just one approach at creating
podcast creation and I think there's one
more screen on editing so we couldn't
really we didn't spend the time to
figure out where this would go into the
greater scheme of the app but you know
one of the things that's that's
interesting is you know this is a
different type of of medium that that
you're probably used to write so on
Android you're probably used to you know
editing photos or editing text or
selecting text you could use the same
metaphors and the same visuals to
indicate or two to apply to audio so you
can do something like long press on the
audio to kind of select like a second or
so and then show these little drag
handles so you can drag them around and
then you can have like an insertion
point so if you have something in the
clipboard then you can kind of like do a
paste you should also offer things we're
going to show this here but you know
things like fade out fade in all sorts
of effects those are very contextual to
the current point in the audio you're
looking at so definitely make sure to
kind of use this type of you I if you're
doing sort of editing it could make a
lot of sense and then we're chatting
about a pretty neat addition or feature
where you could possibly play the first
second of the selected clip and maybe
the last second as well so you can sort
of make sure that your anchor points are
sort of at the point you want them to be
yeah like one way you could do that is
you can offer like little play buttons
here so like a little play button here
and pressing that plays it for a second
and a play button here that plays the
the last second up to that point so you
probably let me just so that like you
have kind of like the I guess not the
pixel perfect but the the frame perfect
view of things another thing I wanted to
mention is is gestures so you also want
to support gestures like you know multi
finger gestures and then like the other
scrolling gesture and if you're
implementing this actually just wanted
to make a kind of a quick shout out
there's a new there's an updated
gestures trainings I guess class if you
go to develop with Angela calm /
training / gestures there's a nice piece
of sample code that shows you how to do
all these different things with all the
different gestures detectors very nice
piece of civil code
yep so I'm very tilted all right so with
that I think that was it for podcast
creation I think we're about halfway so
let's move on to design tools yeah yeah
so design tools when we talk about
design tools we like to you know not
just we like to break things out by the
hat you wear the the discipline so we
don't like to just talk about you know
here's just the basic design tool for
designers it's there's different
disciplines like interaction design
visual design motion design acid
production which is kind of a very
specific thing to Android you know
creating nine patches and things of that
so we like to break down the tools that
that you should be using based on this
type of kind of I guess these hats that
people were and you'll see like a little
circle in each of these slides
indicating what who this is for so the
very first set of tools and this is very
very obvious but the adobe creative
suite and this is you know illustrator
fireworks Photoshop InDesign two things
i really want to quickly call out the
fur actually gets three things the first
is that you know we do have official
android stencils available for these and
so what you saw today with the podcast
creation apps or podcast creation app
was using the official android stencils
for illustrator the next is that you
know most of the android design team as
far as I know they use you know
illustrator fireworks in Photoshop
Illustrator is very very common with our
interaction designers for visual design
I think most of these photoshop and
fireworks but fireworks can actually
work really well for interactive
interaction design as well because I can
actually create clickable sections like
you can have interactive mock-ups and I
think I download this two years ago you
can create like an interactive PDF where
you click on different things and it
takes you to different pages and it's
kind of a much nicer way to to visualize
a flow or to visualize a sequence of
events in your app so definite consider
doing that
and then here's there's a recent article
in smashing my calm and how to use
InDesign to do something very similar I
haven't tried this myself but it seems
really interesting so if you're doing
interaction design definitely check out
this article about in design interaction
design let's move on to some other
interaction design tools you know so for
interaction design obviously one of the
things you want to do is sketch a lot a
lot a lot a lot but there also some some
I guess software tools for for sketching
I guess for creating wireframes and
especially interactive wireframes here's
a quick selection of them I generally
prefer using OmniGraffle since we have
official stencils for those and you can
actually do both low and high fidelity
wireframes they're almost all the other
tools since they don't have official
stencils they have like unofficial
stencils which aren't really high
fidelity which is fine I mean for
wireframes it so it's totally okay a
boss and actually the last three here
fluid UI proto do and balsamiq mockups
those are also really good because
they're web-based and what that means is
that you can create you can create
actual prototypes you know deploy them
to a website and you know share them
with your product manager you could also
you know create I think you can create
logins for other design team members so
you can have like you know multiple
members of the design team working on
the same project all on the web so some
pretty cool stuff there and then proto
that IO is actually something that Paul
Burke recently mentioned to us basically
something that lets you actually mock-up
gestures as well as you can do like
scrolling and swiping and things like
that so lots of good tools here and
there's more than just these obviously
but here's the quick selection of some
of them here's what fluid UI looks like
just a quick example of the interaction
the interactive I guess mock-ups you can
create so in this case you know like
this my agenda tab when you click that
in the final interactive HTML file it
actually takes you to a different page
you can kind of create these links it's
pretty cool
the next thing we want to talk about
with Android design preview so this is
more for visual designers and this
basically lets you mirror a portion of
your screen from your computer to your
to your Android device so let's say you
have photoshop open and you're doing
like AHA you have a high fidelity visual
mock-up open this is actually something
from our from one of our past episodes
so all you need to do is you need to
open up the Android design preview app
this little window that pops up here you
can then drag around this red rectangle
and kind of faint you can't really see
it be dragged it to encapsulate you're
near the part of the screen that you
wanna mirror and then it mirrors that to
your device what's not pictured here is
the i guess the USB cable you plugged in
so you need to use USB and it doesn't
work over Wi-Fi currently but it's
definitely a good tool to have in your
arsenal next we have actually want to
spend a little bit of time on this so
you know a lot of lot of designers on
Android I guess they often not really
complain but they they lament that
there's you know there's a lot of acid
production work to do like you have to
you know create nine patches and you
have to create you know all these
different states for buttons and things
and tabs and what not and you know
certainly you know there are a lot of
things you do need to create you know to
create a really awesome app you need to
think about different screen sizes and
lottery screen size of screen densities
and things like that but there are a lot
of tools out there that can help in the
process and this is especially true if
you're following the holo visual
language right so if you have your
completely custom UI there's not really
anything that will help you with that I
mean there are some tools like some
photoshop actions and and fireworks you
know plugins that i'll do that and but
for the most part you know if you're
following hollow there's some really
good tools online for this so the first
is the android assets to do we covered
this before someone go into detail on it
but the next is the action bar style
generator which we talked about in the
past episode i just want to reiterate
how important it is to use this tool
basically lets you you know very quickly
you know throw in a few colors and it
would
generate all the stuff all the cruft the
xml files the PNG files basically
everything that you need to get your
action bar like kind of to a base level
of theming it's a good jump stat and I
think it's also compatible with the
action bar show yeah that's right so
there's an option to create Sherlock
styles so if you're using
actionbarsherlock you go it'll just work
with you and it's just I just can't
stress how important it is to use this
in addition to actionbarsherlock in
addition to you know the core action bar
API is rather than try to build your own
thing if you try to build your own
custom you know action bar you're just
going to you're going to have to
re-implement a lot of stuff and it's
just not going to look as good so
definitely use this tool if you can and
the last tool which is I think even more
impressive in its technical kind of in
the amount of stuff it does for you is
Android holo colors so Android holo
colors it's very much it's very similar
to action bar it's the action bar style
generator except it creates UI controls
for you so if you want like you know
purple let's say your brand is you know
your core brand accent is purple if you
want purple checkboxes and purple
buttons and purple text fields and
everything Android holo colors will just
generate all this for you you basically
tell it which UI control is you want to
create or which controllers you plan on
using and it will generate those assets
for you the last thing I want to mention
is with the action bar style generator
it's not only good for creating action
bar assets it's also good for creating
touch states so the standard touch state
on Android is this kind of
semi-transparent blue overlay but let's
say you're your brand accent is not blue
right let's say you want to actually you
know use something like red or purple or
whatever one of the things that the
action bar style generator does is it
creates a stateless drawable which is
kind of a stateful drawable a stateful
graphic that contains the the assets for
the different states so for if there's
nothing it's just transparent if it's
pressed it'll actually use your accent
color as that overlay and if it's
focused meaning the keyboard has kind of
you know the user has selected that
item with the keyboard it'll use the
standard kind of focus style with
different levels of translucency but
I'll still apply your accent color so
the action bar style generator is really
good for generating that and I said the
combination of these two tools gets you
most of the way for baseline branding of
a nap so definitely use them really
important to do it last thing I guess
for design tools and we'll probably talk
more in future episodes on design tools
but the last thing I wanted to call out
today is just feedback tools right so
you know we very often provide designers
developers with feedback they give us a
PDFs we provide them with feedback back
so some of the tools that we use our
google drive specifically the docs
editor as well as the PDF editor or the
PDF viewer PDF editors like you know
preview on Mac or Acrobat and sketch and
so you know I'll briefly mention for PDF
letters it's really really really useful
to be able to just you know you know
load up a set of screenshots and just
annotate pdfs of this awesome annotation
feature where you can just drop in a
text bubble annotation you just really
quickly mark up all the different things
that you either see wrong or you like or
whatever and it's a good way for both
developers or product managers to
communicate with designers as well as
for designers to communicate to
developers so designers rather than
using specs or red lines if you don't
want to you could just you know create
your mock-ups you know throw them into a
PDF and then just annotate like this
should stretch this should you know
should be whatever something else you
could use PDF editors or PDF and yeah we
use this as a feedback mechanism a lot
it's worth noting though that not all
PDF viewers support adding these
annotations but a lot do so you know if
you're looking for it in your particular
PDF viewer you may need to switch to
another one if you can't find it yeah
and for Google Drive one of the things I
love by Google Drive is its commenting
abilities so in Doc's you can just you
know spawn a comment thread on a
specific line of feedback and then in
the image editor or the image viewer as
well as the
the PDF preview I believe there's a way
to kind of like highlight a certain
portion and start a comment thread on
like a single rectangle kind of so it's
similar to the PDF editor in the sense
that you can kind of annotate things but
certainly it's you know the combination
of these two tools we found to be super
good it's nice when there's a lot of
back and forth when you get a few people
come into a particular issue will call
it yeah and the last one it's a sketch
so sketches you know something that
basically lets you annotate screenshots
and it's really useful for feedback on
specific photos or specific mock-ups it
doesn't it doesn't let you work with
multiple it doesn't easily let you work
with multiple things at once multiple
screen shots at once as far as I know
but it's certainly very useful for you
know creating arrows and annotations and
things that on top of your mock-ups so
these are some of the tools we use like
I said before we'll probably talk about
more in the future so with that let's
just quickly cover design news I think
we only have one item the only item is
from from Paul Burke so we mentioned i
think last in the last show two weeks
ago that there was a New York City
Android designers meetup went really
well and if you came then is great
meeting you and thanks for coming but if
you weren't there Paul actually shared a
presentation on some resources saying
some good community resources for
designers so here's the link to the
presentation I guess the slides
definitely take a look and I think we'll
probably posting another on York City
Android designers meet up sometime in
the next hopefully a few months or so
but yeah thanks for coming if you came I
think that's it that's it for the show
so yeah one last thing I want to give a
shout out to the app clinic the show
that our teammates run on the west coast
they often delve more into the technical
side of things it's definitely tune in
for tune into that later this week and
they'll be covering podcast creation
apps as far as in it I don't know what
they'll be talking about but something
related to podcast creation so if you
like the podcast creation stuff tune in
there alright thanks for joining guys as
always I'm Roman Eric items Adam Koch
see you guys peace out
you